welcome back once again ladies and
gentlemans wow I think I just doubled my
listenership thanks to all you Chinese
martial arts lovers for taking the time
to check out the last episode Laszlo
Montgomery here with part 2 of this very
very brief overview of a subject that
deserves its own podcast genre so vast
last time we convene I tried to show how
Chinese martial arts gongfu kung foo
schooi all those different names for the
same thing how this all started and how
it developed in China throughout the
centuries I know a lot of you were
hoping I was gonna introduce more of the
styles and techniques and whatnot
associated with each school Kris be out
in the great football capital of
Manchester England was really lobbying
for a Tai Chi trend to be included
that'll get its own episode one of these
days martial arts it's one of those
things to introduce the subtleties and
mark differences of even a few of the
more popular styles and then once you
start talking about this you got to talk
about that and on and on it goes and
well I didn't want to make this another
suku Tran shoe so I hope you still enjoy
the V well I hesitate to call it the
fast food version that stuff's not good
for you I know a lot e we're hoping to
get a deeper dive than what I was able
to put together if at least a few of you
got inspired to explore martial arts a
little bit more and my job is done I
could die in peace once again a lot of
Cantonese and Mandarin names and terms
everything is located on my website a
teacup dot media if you want to follow
along all the Chinese English and I put
the Cantonese romanization as well that
might make it easier to follow
Wing Chun or young twin in Mandarin
that's a style at gongfu that's popular
and practiced and probably every country
on the planet I'm guessing it's a global
thing not to mention something of great
cultural pride to a lot of Chinese for
you know their particular contribution
to bringing this to the world martial
arts didn't only come out of China I
mean
where there were humans congregating
together these arts emerged every
culture and civilization past and
present have their own martial arts
history but like with Chinese tea
ceramics natural medicine science civil
engineering and so much more
the Chinese contribution to the martial
arts became something particularly
spectacular and refined Chinese wushu
was unique for example how over the
centuries it became so infused with
ancient Chinese thoughts from Taoism
Buddhism and Confucianism it was a
source of fascination to people
everywhere practitioners and non
practitioners of gongfu for its balance
of aesthetic elegance and deadliness so
let's sit back and zoom in from lower
down than the Felix Baumgartner level of
last episode and enjoy some of the
legends of Wing Chun Kung Fu and then
we'll look at the apeman lineage and
talk about this man whose name and
reputation has grown far beyond his
original achievements as a teacher and
popularizer of Wing Chun after so many
films hitman and Wing Chun have become
part of worldwide popular culture so
we'll look at his life too and in
looking at anyone's life in China it's
another chance to study it in the
context of the Chinese history they
lived in it Mun they lived 1893 to 1972
the arc of his life stretched from the
Guangxu Emperor to Richard Nixon's visit
to China during the week that changed
the world so we'll look at Grand Master
it later on after more than 2,500 years
of development that continues even into
our day when you distill it down into
its essence Chinese wushu or martial
arts is practiced in order to achieve
three things primarily improving your
health in particular your motor nervous
respiratory and cardiovascular systems
secondly and I dare to say most famously
as a means of self-defense and lastly
these martial arts as developed in China
became a vehicle for all manners of
ocean or self cultivation this holistic
kind of wushu wasn't just learning how
to defend yourself and put away an
opponent it concerned your entire being
not just your physical being your mind
your spirit and your Chi I know I didn't
say much of anything about Chi and
Qigong this is the life force inside you
and from which all things are made if
you remember from the philosophy series
tai chi or Tai Chi Chen BA kua Chang and
Xie Jin these three most popular styles
of martial arts are saturated with
Chinese philosophy in yang Theory
whooshing the five elements they're all
tied together Tai Chi Tran is closely
related with the Tai Chi to sha
childrenís masterwork referenced last
episode the diagram explaining the
supreme ultimate in fact I'm going to
post the PDF infographic that accompany
the history of philosophy series which
has the Tai Chi to draw on it
Matt Sheehan was kind enough to tweet
that freebie from the marketing
department of teacup media out to the
world last night you can download that
with my compliments looks great and 11
by 17 a3 sized laminated of course as
math did I actually posted it on the web
page from last episode and forgot to
mention that so please go groove on that
useful infographic teacup dot media or
if that's too complicated just email me
at laws low yet teacup dot media and
I'll personally send you a PDF and
yin-yang these two opposing forces also
discussed ad nauseam and that philosophy
series these complimentary opposites
were always front and center in Chinese
martial arts especially as the momentum
picked up in the northern and southern
dynasties period yin-yang exhale inhale
fast slow stretch recoil rise fall Oh
then closed solid empty hard soft attack
defend Ian and young complimentary
opposites and I didn't mention last
episode that according to martial arts
historian Congo there are a hundred and
twenty nine different kinds of boxing or
chin and over a hundred different kinds
of cold weapons cold weapons again from
last episode was anything that didn't
use gunpowder Peter Lorre gin his book
Chinese martial arts from antiquity to
the 21st century said quote no currently
practice style of Chinese martial arts
can reliably trace itself back more than
a few centuries and most much less than
that end quote
but last episode we saw how everything
there is today and that developed since
the late Qing Dynasty all came from a
body of work that had been continuously
improving since the earliest days of
recorded Chinese history in the shang
dynasty these ancients left records many
of which somehow managed to make it into
our day a lot of it in the forms of
legends and highly unbelievable stories
but also in other forms that showed how
Chinese wushu evolved over the dynasties
so anyway let's look at the Wing Chun
style as an example of one of the
hundreds of other styles of Chinese
martial arts I only mentioned what be
five or six and that's the proverbial
tip of the iceberg if you google list of
Chinese martial arts you'll see there
are maybe around sixty or seventy
different kinds that come up including
Wing Chun Jing Wu ba kua cha whooshing
tren and for many of these styles they
can be even further broken down into
regional or other kinds of variations
but the Wing Chun style of Chinese Gong
foo was destined for immortality thanks
to it being the style Bruce Lee made
famous in his movie career which acted
as a kind of gateway for millions of
people everywhere - you know Chinese
martial arts 1966-1967 I'm
every single episode of The Green Hornet
van Williams as Britt Reid Bruce Lee as
Kato Bruce Lee's real name was Lee Chun
fan but in Hong Kong and elsewhere he's
better known by his stage name of Lee
Xiao long Xiao long his little dragon
he studied Wing Chun under it man so
brilliant and magnificent was the legacy
of Bruce Lee's achievement one of it
man's own legacies ended up being the
teacher who taught Wing Chun style
gongfu to Bruce Lee but no less
important it Mun along with the Sun if
Jun yejoon and other disciples they
acted as ambassadors to the world for
this southern style of Chinese Gong foo
it's practiced in probably every country
in the world and there's plenty of
people like me who don't practice
Chinese martial arts but have witnessed
the spine-chilling skills and beauty of
Wing Chun on the silver screen so let's
close out the CHP martial arts overview
with the legends and lore behind the
creation of Wing Chun and the man who
brought it to Hong Kong and from there
to the whole world like I mentioned last
episode Shaolin Temple being such a
high-profile place as it was inevitably
got sucked into Imperial politics who
knows for sure when this happened but
the monks of Shaolin were somehow tied
to some anti Ching dynasty conspiracies
and though this is a documented so far
as I know sometime in the mid-1800s the
Manchu army moved in and put the place
to the torch aside from destroying
Shaolin they killed a lot of monks and
tried to rip this problem they believed
they had they're up by the roots
whenever there was even mild suspicion
about some conspiracy to overthrow the
Ching and restore the Ming Dynasty now
the Manchus took that threat very
seriously and didn't mess around
unfortunately for the Ching Court five
senior masters from Shaolin Temple
escaped and these became known as
the legendary five elders the Shaolin
would zoo what Bodhidharma started some
1300 years before at this temple during
the northern and southern dynasties
period was rescued from possible
oblivion by these four men and one woman
Wing Chun is rooted in the gongfu styles
that came out of this Shaolin Temple
located on Xiao shirt peak of the somme
mountains in Hunan Province and of the
five elders who escaped the swords of
the Ching army the one we're most
concerned with is the woman boy or wumei
in mandarin the other four were master
Zhu Shan Shan shirt by maid Aldrin a
Taoist priest fund out the and Miao
Chien lots of legends and stories about
each of these Wu Tzu were five elders of
Shaolin Temple all of the southern
styles of Chinese gongfu not just Wing
Chun are traced back to master Zhi Shan
Shan shirt the abbot of the legendary
Fujian southern Shaolin Temple where
some of those who escaped the Ching army
ended up let me just say here there are
more than one version of who master
Church in China sure was and what his
association with the northern and
southern temples actually was who made
sure she was the most legendary and
greatest of these five elders and she
was the creator of Wing Chun
her father was general which explained
how she became familiar with wushu early
in life she also may or may not have
been a Buddhist nun living at Shaolin
when the Ching army came calling
now lacking the physical advantages of
her male inhabitants of Shaolin
Monastery Wu Mei had developed her own
variation of the styles taught at
Shaolin over the centuries
she had meticulously studied the Masters
there and from their teachings and
techniques she developed a way that took
their gongfu a bit further
she created a style that had two primary
advantages its effectiveness as a means
of self-defense
and attacking didn't depend so much on
strength and this style
could be picked up and mastered quicker
than most other styles of kungfu it
didn't matter if you were Donnie Yen
five foot eight hundred and sixty five
pounds or Kareem Jabbar or a young
teenager if properly learned they worked
the same room--a had devised a way to
use the opposing yin energy to redirect
an opponent's force rather than what
most styles taught to use young energy
to crash up against an opponent anyone
who's seen the apeman movie can remember
thee the wooden object he constantly
practiced on it's called a wooden dummy
in English and day mu R and rung in
Chinese I read a story that mentioned
the design of this iconic Wing Chun
training device was credited to Wu Mei
just saying the legend
it's as good a legend as any of them
said their wool maze inspiration for
some of the movements in her style came
from observing duels in nature between
either a crane and a snake or a stork
and a rodent
she had seen in nature that certain
animals were given the gifts of being
able to attack and defend simultaneously
through the efficiency of their
movements their speed dexterity and
sheer focus and concentration something
that was perfect for a close-range
hand-to-hand combat so as we discussed
last episode with Wang Lung and the
praying mantis style Wu Mei has well
received her burst of inspiration from
nature and applied it to human beings as
far as the southern Shaolin Temple went
there's a very murky legend and that's
all it is for any lack of any halfway
decent substantiation that says when the
ching military went in and destroyed
shaolin temple it was to fujian province
that some of these five elders went and
reestablished a southern shaolin temple
down there the only problem as I said is
no concrete evidence of anything and no
temple was ever found but oral tradition
is often rooted in truth and I won't say
there was never a southern temple but
from this southern temple somewhere in
Fujian
the arts of Shaolin were perpetuated and
continued to develop another version of
the southern temple legend says that
after shaolin temple was attacked and
all five elders scattered who may end up
in some town near the Yunnan Sichuan
border area in southwest China at a
place called the White Crane temple
living there also by chance was a
certain man named Jim Yee
that's his Cantonese name yen R in
Mandarin he was from Guangdong and had
been unjustly accused of some crime and
had fled to this same general area
multiple stories about who he was and it
was Jimmy's daughter who was named Yim
Wing Chun yen young twin together they
lived in this remote place and southwest
China and she helped her father out at
his modest tofu stall at the local
market now in the old Chinese
traditional style young young Wing Chun
had already been betrothed to a local
boy named Leon pup Chou lien Porto in
mandarin as fate would have it there was
also some local warlord strongman you
know a tough guy the kind nobody likes
and who has been a Hollywood staple
since the 1920s young Wing Chun had
caught his eye and he took one look at
her and was lovestruck and using his
position of power and dominance he
started making moves on gave him winged
wooden and demanded her hand in marriage
from eunyi well here's where things get
interesting some local woman who was a
regular customer of Yin Yi and his dough
foo stand saw what was happening and
stepped in to help and this woman was
none other than wumei herself one of the
escaped five elders of Shaolin Temple
and to this location by sheer chance she
had fled she approached EMU and said she
saw what was going on and wanted to
assist him in his time of need
she told him she was willing to teach
and train his daughter in the gongfu
style that she had developed herself
during her time at Shaolin Temple she
told young Yi
could teach his daughter this martial
art quickly and that she would be able
to make fast work of this brute in a
competition Yummie was able to perform
some fancy footwork with this antagonist
who had invaded their peaceful life and
he made a deal with him whereby he would
agree to his daughter's hand in marriage
if after a certain agreed upon period he
could defeat her in a martial arts
competition and if he bested his
daughter they would marry at once if not
no woman no cry and after the details
were worked out who may went to work she
trained yim wing-chun this style of
gongfu that she had developed herself up
at Shaolin she taught young young Wing
Chun or yang yeongjun everything she
knew and because this style of kung fu
wu mei had developed could be learned
quickly and didn't require such physical
strength that comes naturally to a man
we can try and pick this skill up
quickly of course it didn't hurt having
one of the five elders of Shaolin Temple
is your Sifu when the day finally came
and it didn't even take a year the match
was held with the unwanted suitor and he
was defeated soundly by yim wing-chun
and as the whole village celebrated and
with her work done Wu Mei told him Wing
Chun to go forth and spread this style
of Kung Fu wherever she traveled and the
last thing will may told her student was
to teach this gongfu to all who wish to
learn it with the ultimate objective
being to use this skill in the fight
against the Manchu Ching dynasty and to
restore the Ming and with that who may
departed and was never seen or heard
from again actually throughout Chinese
history one constant that held actually
throughout Chinese history one constant
was that the most glorious use of these
Shu these martial arts was to use them
in the defense of the country the damsel
in distress the oppressed villagers sure
helped those guys out too but nothing
out trumped utilizing these skills in
the service of your country so young
Wing Chun was now free to marry
her beloved Young Buck chao-li on parole
and she taught her husband the entirety
of her wing chewin skill said as it was
taught to her directly by one of the
five elders of shaolin temple
Leon porch ho was fast learner and in
time he not only mastered Wing Chun
gongfu he gave the style its name using
his wife for inspiration of course and
began to take on students this was late
18th century early to mid 19th and this
is the genesis of the lineage that led
directly to it Mun and ultimately Bruce
Lee and with all the interest generated
by this great Hong Kong superstar with
his charisma his acting chops and his
sheer love and perfection of his craft
Bruce Lee inspired millions more around
the world to follow the Wing Chun path
this is where it all began there are
multiple versions of stories about Leon
porch Hall and how he came into Yemi and
young wing Chun's world and his role and
handing down the mantle of leadership of
this school to the next generation as
one of the legends go the student who
inherited his Sifu young boy chose
mastery was Leland qui Liang Liang great
lan kwai fong was not named after him
but they share the same name Lee Heung
LAN quite was the next who mastered Wing
Chun and carried on the teachings passed
on to him by LAN bought role this is
still the 19th century my apology says I
switch back and forth between the
Cantonese and Mandarin names of all
these people although I lived in Hong
Kong nine years I only managed to
understand some Cantonese but I never
learned how to speak it and what little
I learned I never learned how to speak
it properly I'm much more comfortable
referring to everyone by their Mandarin
name as always well almost always
all of the Chinese terms you hear in
this episode are meticulously listed on
the web page in a downloadable format
from here on out we're only talking
about gongfu as it developed in southern
China the North did it one way and the
South they had their own styles some
will say the northern styles used more
kicking and the South was more about
striking and BOC
saying yeah I'm sure it's slightly more
complicated but being a southern Chinese
story these greats I'm gonna mention
well they're all better known by their
Cantonese name so just another nod to my
Cantonese speakers sorry if this ends up
sounding weird referring to most
everyone by their Mandarin names
I'll stick with it month rather than
referring to him as yeah when okay back
to our story this is where the fabled
red boat opera comes in that may not be
wholly true but if the events unfolded
the way it mon and other said they did
and the way I'm describing here and what
a story it was it went like this
there was this traveling opera company
called the red boat opera troupe or the
home Tron sheet bun
disguised as itinerant theatre
performers a legendary group of kung-fu
masters traveled on this boat from river
town to river town and performed
Cantonese or perhaps Foshan opera for
all the locals their skills and
acrobatics were huge crowd places and
they had rightfully made a name for
themselves along the rivers where their
home Wan traversed but as the legend
goes while they went from place to place
and performed for the townspeople at the
same time they would also spread anti
Ching dynasty propaganda and urged the
people to rise up when the time came to
of the opera performers on the red boat
her name lee young-ae Ty and Wang hua PO
Jung Rd and Huang hua Paul they had once
studied Wing Chun from Leland Kwai who
as I just said was a student of Leon
Porto husband of Yim Wing Chun who as I
said learn this style of kung fu
straight from the tap from wumei da sure
but what a coincidence again besides
young etai and wawapo
who else happen to be working as a cook
on the red boat hiding out in plain
sight it was none other than the escaped
abbot of shaolin temple himself
Gershon chan sure abbot church on after
the southern temple had been destroyed
by the Manchus fled the scene and ended
up talking his way onto this red bow
as I said working as a cook and waiting
for the right time to reveal himself
aperture shine had become a master of a
weapon called the six and a half point
Paul the Leo TN bong-gun this was a 240
to 260 centimeter long pole that's 94 to
102 inches for my fellow non-metric
speaking American skis this six and a
half point Paul along with the butterfly
swords are the two primary weapons used
in wing chun abbot church and taught
young etai and wawapo his mastery of the
long pole and liang italian wawapo
thereupon taught abbot church on the
wing chun gongfu
taught to them by Liang Liang choir and
from this union of skills the
six-and-a-half point Paul the lakhtin
bun Guan or Leo Dan band Gong long pole
became part of wing twin the next Wing
Chun master lived from 1826 to 1901 he
was the immortal of Liang zan for
shantung Jian Xiong mr. Liang from
Foshan they called him among other
epithets he was a well-known person in
Foshan who ran an old-fashioned Chinese
apothecary
he was the herbalist of choice for local
for Chinese whenever they had one kind
of ailment or another one day was
visited at a shot by Leung heat I
remember him he was one of the guys who
worked on the red boat opera the young
heat I had a chat with Leung Jan and
after a while he agreed to take Leung
Jan on as a student
so both Leung he tie and wawapo passed
on their mastery of Wing Chun to Leung
Jan or Leung Chun in Mandarin and many
said so incredible so accomplished and
precise were Liang zan skills that he
took wing trunk to a new level start of
finishing it off like a Itza sure who
perfects a piece of writing with a
single added character Liang Chun who
was born sometime in the early 1820s or
there abouts with
go on to become one of the greatest and
certainly most revered of all winged
twin masters in his own day he was also
known as the winged - and kun Wang the
young twin chen-wong the king of winged
twin fists our winged twin fighting no
kidding
300 challengers went down in defeat
against Liang Chun yeah Leung Jan and
Floyd Mayweather jr. undefeated baby
no one ever beat Liang Chun he was so
renowned in his day for his fighting
skills not only against other
challengers within the winged twin
school but he'd take on comers from
other schools no matter their style beat
them all Liang zan has also been kind of
a staple and a lot of old and new
kung-fu movies and TV dramas he was from
so long ago and it's hard to separate
the facts from the fake news but he's
certainly revered in his career Liang
Shan only had time to teach three
students two of which were his sons
Liang B and Liang Shuang the third
student was a local money changer in
Foshan named Chen hua Shan he lived 1833
to 1913 Chung was already quite
accomplished in other styles of gongfu
before he began studying Wing Chun under
Liang's son as the story goes he was
sort of a samo Hong Hong combo kind of a
guy big beefy from carrying all these
heavy coins he exchanged at his money
changers stall very very stout and
strong not too long after Liang Zhan
passed in 1901 this student
Chen hua Xuan opened up a wing twin
school in Foshan as a way to show his
respect for his Sifu Chen hua Xuan only
had a few disciples the last one of
which was it man if man as I said that's
my incorrect Cantonese pronunciation of
the Mandarin yet when he too like these
others I just named also came from the
same great cultural powerhouse of Foshan
Guangdong Province the home of Cantonese
opera oh sure
lion dancing and Lingnan wushu Lingnan
this term perhaps you recall from the
recently concluded history a China
Vietnam relations Ling nan was that part
of China that included southern
Guangdong Guangxi and northern Vietnam
so Ling nan is synonymous with southern
China with an emphasis on southern
Guangdong perhaps you could say that is
right where Foshan is located north of
gyeongmin and Chong Shan southwest of
Guangzhou and on the other side of the
Pearl River Delta from dong Quan and
because of the plethora of great martial
arts masters who came out of Ling nan in
general and Foshan in particular that
place is also called the wolf shooter
Xiang the land of martial arts
if Mun came from money which meant he
received a nice education growing up in
Foshan and enjoyed an early life filled
with refinement and all the best
traditional Chinese education had to
offer he started off as a student of
Chen hua Xuan Master Chen was way too
serious about his craft and when yet man
first showed up at his Wu Guang for
lessons then at first Chen was reluctant
to take on as young rich kid as a
student he didn't want to waste his time
or waste something so important as his
mastery of Wing Chun and someone so
young and with such seemingly little
prospects but Chen hua Shan did decide
to teach young it man charging him some
exorbitant instruction fee which the
family willingly forked over proving the
old adage that every person has their
price unfortunately if man was only able
to study a few years with Chen hua Shan
before the Grandmaster who had studied
directly under Long John one of only
three students passed in 1906 from that
point on and into the 1920s Chen wash
ones most accomplished student Zhang Sol
took over the mantle of Wing Chun master
and as the teacher of all those in the
1930s who would go on to personal
greatness
and Mandarin he was called woo jong-soo
no one was more important to Wing Chun
in teaching the next generation of
greats than Wukong Hsu he didn't have
the name recognition of his more famous
students but during the 1910s and 20s he
was the public face and greatest living
practitioner of Wing Chun Wing Chun in
the 1930s was still just one of many
styles being practiced all over southern
China and of course in Foshan and as far
as styles went Wing Chun was hardly the
most popular Chen hua Chaun had been the
first to open a formal school that
taught Wing Chun publicly but it had
hardly made a big splash and besides as
I mentioned last episode the Boxer
Rebellion which had nothing to do with
Wing Chun and not much to do with boxing
either it had besmirched the martial
arts in the West anyway but also to a
degree in China I don't know if the
outcome of the Boxer Rebellion and the
vilification of those who participated
in it had any real impact on how the
Chinese viewed will shew at a mass level
but in the international communities
this was feared or looked down on wushu
in Chen Washington's time was more and
more starting to branch out into a form
of both physical and mental self
cultivation up to that point it had
predominantly been practiced for other
reasons to prepare oneself for a life in
the military for one or law enforcement
by the 1920s and certainly in the 1930s
the idea that people might practice
wushu as a hobby or for the love of the
art or as a way to belong it started to
take off still had a long way to go
before it reached the heights of our
modern day but on the eve of the
Japanese invasion of China 1937 it was
already more than just a way to train
for some kind of career that might
require the skill set as I said Chen hua
Xuan's greatest student was in Jung so
in his dying days Chen hua Chaun
implored anjaam soul to continue
teaching it man this student who we saw
so much potential in Zhang saw was true
his word and took over as hitman Sifu
teaching him the same wing chewin style
of gongfu that wumei herself developed
up in Shaolin Temple all those years ago
the center of gravity for this style of
Chinese wushu
continued to be in the city of Foshan
there if man continued his training and
Wing Chun along with a few other
students that in Jong so took on besides
it man there was also you in Khe Sanh
and yo Choi who collectively with it
became known as the three heroes of Wing
Chun the Yong Chun Sun shone in Jong so
was there Sifu you in Khe Sanh or Ranchi
Shan besides his renown in China as a
master of Wing Chun was also credited
with bringing this martial art to
Vietnam
yo choy or Y outs I lived 1890 to 1956
he was also of that fifth generation of
Wing Chun greats who studied with it Mun
though some stories claim it for a while
at least he was it man Sifu but he was
certainly one of the greatest of his
generation
the three heroes of Wing Chun tip man's
family sent him to Hong Kong as a young
teen to further his studies he was
enrolled at the famous st. Stephen's
College still around today 22 Tong
Taiwan Road in Stanley as a historic
institution for a number of reasons
mentioned in a couple past episodes as
fate would have it in 1908 during his
days as a young student in Hong Kong
if Mun ran into Leung bik remember him
Leung be the son of Leung Jan the great
master who you recall had remained
undefeated in 300 bouts so there in Hong
Kong it Minh continued his Wing Chun
studies with this young big first Chen
hua Xuan then wudong su and now Leung
bik no shortage of great teachers for it
man
my Hong Kong listeners are probably
thinking geez this guy switches back
between Cantonese and Mandarin could he
just pick one sorry about that as far as
how it maan and Leung bik got hooked up
in Hong Kong there's an old story about
how it Mun
one stepped in to defend some local Hong
Kong person who was being roughed up
unjustly and manhandled by the police as
it went he come food the cop and laid
him down gently in front of us several
witnesses and one of these bystanders
who saw the whole thing
relayed the story to Leung bik who later
arranged a meet-up with it Mon and as I
said became his Sifu for 10 years he
stuttered under Liang pick Liang be the
son of the master Liang Chen who had
learned these skills from the men of the
storied Hong Tron sheet bun the red boat
opera true around age 24
hitman went back to Foshan and ended up
running a small wing twin school there
this is in the mid 1930s then 1937 not a
good year for China Japan launched their
invasion and it didn't take long for
Foshan to be overrun with japanese
imperial troops those of you who saw the
first hit man movie the 2008 film
starring Donnie Yen recall things didn't
go well for it Mon and all Chinese
residing in Foshan under the Japanese
occupation it was a miserable time and
the teaching of Chinese martial arts was
impacted
I'm sure the drama depicted in the first
movie didn't go exactly like that but
anyone unfamiliar with Japan's 1937 and
1945 occupation of certain parts of
China that movie helped to lift the
curtain up a few inches you got the idea
but after the war ended in 1945 China
didn't catch much of a break and had to
endure four more years wrecked by Civil
War during that time if man was still in
Foshan and worked as a policeman for the
Nationalist government then in 1949 when
the Nationalists were defeated it man
fled to Hong Kong for safety a lot of
people who had not supported the
Communists during the Civil War had the
same idea and there in Hong Kong it man
with the help of a good friend and
Foshan homey started a wing to ins cool
at the Kowloon Hotel staff Association
headquarters this was like a restaurant
workers union
later opened up another school in 1967
called the Wing Chun Athletic
Association the Yong Chun tu wait slowly
slowly it moons renowned in Hong Kong
for his teaching abilities and for the
Wing Chun style that he brought to that
place gained and reputation and
popularity prior to it Mong Wang Xuan's
style kungfu wasn't as well-known in
Hong Kong the awareness all began with
it Minh and though the style was gaining
everyday in popularity the teaching of
students and it didn't make it Mong a
rich man it man's greatest legacy would
probably be all he did in creating this
awareness about Wing Chun and laying the
foundation that allowed the art to
spread around the world but he's most
famous perhaps as the first teacher of
Bruce Lee in 1950 right after it man
arrived in Hong Kong and after the
establishment of the PRC the Chinese
character for Wing Chun Jung hoon was
changed initially Yong Chun meant
eternal spring young means eternal
forever this was young woman's name but
Grandmaster it man called for a change
in the Chinese character young to a
different character it was still young
third tone but now a new character this
new one meant to chant or to sing so it
could be literally translated as young
twin Chen singing spring fist young also
means to express or narrate in poetic
form the English spelling for Wing Chun
was also given a an official name change
from WI ng c hu n to VI ng Tsun today
there are over 2 million people around
the world learning and practicing the
Wing Chun style of Chinese gongfu that
had its roots in Shaolin Temple you can
see in all the it Man movies master it
was often puffing away in a zig I mean
he died from throat cancer on December
2nd 1972 seven months before the death
of his most famous student
Bruce Lee yes the stories go if man was
no stranger to the opium pipe either
because of the forbidden nature of opium
and our day a lot of hay is made about
it Mun and his association with OPM but
nobody was following him around with a
GoPro or iPhone so short of that who
knows how much of this was true he was
the ninth generation Grand Master of
Wing Chun going all the way back to one
of the Shaolin would sue the five elders
of Shaolin Temple Wu Mei it man lived
his last years in Mongkok 149th on Troy
Street not too far from Nathan and Mong
Kok roads and in the tradition of young
Chan who passed his mastery of Wing Chun
on to his sons Leung bik and Leung Chun
so did it man with his sons if John and
if Jiang who in the north of China are
known as yeah John and yes Jung I forgot
where I read this but I heard after it
man passed they found thousands and
thousands of dollars and undeposited
checks in his flat but probably from
students who he knew couldn't afford the
training so he just let them pay him but
he never cashed the checks mmm sort of
what kind of a person he was yeah it
didn't end with if man of course
succeeding at maan later his Grand
Master was more yet and Mandarin his
name was pronounced may II he lived 1938
to 2001 and had studied under it maan
from 1957 till its passing in 1972 more
yet was 34 at the time of his seafoods
death his name had been bestowed upon
him from his Sifu it man he was the one
who gave more yet is his name this was
the time 1970s that the so called
Cambrian explosion occurred not only
with Wing Chun but so many other ancient
and modern styles that came out of Hong
Kong and Greater China and out into the
world Moria by the way had been
introduced to it man by his cousin Moy
Bing wha who was fortunate to have also
counted himself
among it minds students and I mentioned
this Amoy being watch is passed away
recently on May 26 about a month ago
well yacht had begun teaching in Hong
Kong in 1962 he became the youngest Sifu
ever of Wang Xuan attaining this level
by the time he was 24 the reason for
grandmaster moy yachts mentioned is that
besides his achievements in mastering
Wing Chun and his tireless dedication to
teaching he moved to New York City and
he opened up a woman her martial arts
studio and he brought Wing Chun to the
Big Apple and now it's been generations
since my yacht came to these shores and
Wing Chun has I guess you could say
spread out across the entirety of
America and I'm not just talking about
the lower 48 one of my yachts more well
known students with sunny tang another
Hong Konger who went out into the world
and brought the Wing Chun he learned
under it man and moy yacht to England
first Wurster in 1971 and then on to our
great and friendly neighbor to the north
the nation of Canada by the way it was
recently announced will co-host the 2026
World Cup along with Mexico and the USA
going back to the beginning with Wu Mei
who taught this martial art to the
desperate Yim Wing Chun from which the
style gets its name and all through the
lineage of grandmasters all the way to
Moy yet the dedication of these martial
artists has taken their style of Kung Fu
to thousands and millions here in
America and all over the world who have
learned this and for many made it the
centerpiece of their physical and
spiritual person and even after the
passing of Moy Yat
the torch was passed on to a new Wing
Chun grandmaster moy on my dong studied
under Moy yacht beginning in 1980 and
was fortunate to have been close to Moy
see Phu for the next two decades until
the Grandmaster Moy Yat passed Moy dong
used to commute from his home in Philly
to New York Chinatown to study under
Moyer and the dedication you read about
in all the great Lucia novels and the
stories from all the martial arts master
of their commitment to the perfection of
their craft boy dung into his generation
he keeps it going in Virginia today and
had his other schools and hundreds of
dedicated seafoods just like Moy dong
around the world are doing the same
thing they didn't have the honour of
studying under more yet but not everyone
gets to learn Wing Chun from the
teachers who could trace their lineage
to the direct descendants of the five
elders of Shaolin Temple so I hope you
found this little overview of the
history of Wing Chun gongfu to your
liking there are dozens of other styles
that have been embraced all over the
world by the masses and beyond these
most popular Chinese martial arts there
are hundreds more that originated in
China and styles that were introduced
from other countries Thailand Brazil
Japan Korea so next time you're watching
some gongfu display in person or on the
silver screen I hope you'll all
appreciate the longevity and richness of
Chinese martial arts it's one of the
many things that define this magnificent
millennia-old culture a lot of people
say yeah Chinese culture so cool well
this is one of the reasons and what else
is there to say
there's plenty more multimedia resources
out there for you to go explore if you
want to do your own deep dives these two
episodes were only a little it's all
makan qua overview of the history of
Chinese martial arts in Wing Chun anyone
checking out the China history podcast
for the first time welcome got plenty
stuff for you to go explore go to the
website a tea cup dot media from there
you can hook up with all these other
joints who stooped to allow me onto
their platform
YouTube SoundCloud stitcher tune in
radio Spotify the usual suspects you
know they are Congo Wolf spring autumn
the spring and autumn of Chinese martial
arts 5,000 years
I recommend that book if you want to
hear more details about the history of
martial arts thanks to Michael bang
Steen for being the final straw that
got me to finally take on this subject
and every one of you emailed me since
2010 asking me to cover the subject I
hope you're not too let down the CHP is
a proud member of the recorded history
podcast network recorded history dotnet
okay by the time you hear this I'll be
Manila boned gonna be there June 21st to
28th that's it for this time I do thank
all y'all's for tuning in this is Lazlo
Montgomery signing off from an
underground bunker in an undisclosed
location in the City of Angels Los
Angeles California the sister city of
historic Wong Joe I'll have you know
join me again next time won't you for
another exciting episode of the China
history podcast
you